IV.EGYA(OSOFO ) AHOR

Egya Ahor or Osofo Ahor was a Chief priest of the Fante Kingdom ever since they lived in Takyiman.

He is said to have lived in the 12th Century BC.

He was among the eminent leaders who led the Fantes in their migration from Takyiman to their present day settlement

His people relied or sepended on him largely for almost everything about life and work.

Egya Ahor was a priest for the god 'Akyen' whom the  Fantes believed protected them .

Periodically,Egya Ahor was performed some rites or ceremonies (rituals) to the god 'Akyen' on behalf of the Fantes.

Sacred items he used for his priestly rituals included :
Priestly hat (sebokyew)
an iron walking Stick (Apea)
gong-gong which he used to summon the people and a priestly book (adowno)

He used the Adowno for identification of days especially for planting and harvesting in the year .

With the help of the god 'Akyen' Egya Ahor used the Adowno to predict the beginning and ending of the rainy dry seasons respectively.

The people were therefore informed about the time to prepare the land for agricultural activities to begin

He also used the Adowno to inform the people when
"Akyenmu' would be celebrated

By this all  noise making, funerals and other social activities are prohibited .
Offenders to this directives were punished (received all sort of punishment)

He belonged to the Anona royal family of the Gomoah Traditional area in the Fanteland

During his priestly reign an
epidemic broke out killing most of his people

After several failed attempt a Chief priest -Akomany (Okomfo Amana)
Prescribed human sacrifice to avert the situation .

For the love of his people Egya Ahor willingly offered himself to be sacrificed to the gods and the ancestors for the people to be saved.etc .

Some moral lessons from the life of Egya Ahor
He:
1.performed his religious duties deligently
2.brave and courageous

3.offered himself to be sacrificed for the good of his people

,4., appointed his succesor before his death


,5.was kind (generous) to his people by using his farm produce

6.showed love everyone who sought for his help
7.was a selfless leader

8.,was a peace maker-he ensured that there was peace among the Fantes



https://gh.opera.news/gh/en/lifestyle/0db9373e160101d954e4dd58d8eeed89

